## Last Week

### Versioning

Soooo, initially I had planned to work on versioning. I pivoted to something else entirely. The main
reason is that it was introducing way too much complexity very early on, for a value that was not
super clear yet.

Schemas, that I still plan to support but in a different way (see below), will not really need to be
versioned anymore. The user will use a VCS for that. Because of the dynamic nature of these schemas,
it will not be a problem to collaborate or rollback without having to implement an in-database
versioning system.

### Github Organization

I've spent the beginning of the week to setup the `goat-db` organization, create the
[RFCs](https://github.com/goat-db/rfcs) repo and a couple of other ones. For now I'm going to keep all of this private
because I'm not sure yet how to approach all of this.

One thing I like is that is makes things a bit more tangible now. Having to create this devlog entry
every week and follow an RFC process (with myself only lol) helps to feel just a little bit more
accountable. There's a bit of motivational aspect to it.

### Typing and schemas

I've been thinking about this quite a lot, and still am to be honest. I would like the user to be
able to specify a schema but I want this to be optional. After all, the storage engine is flexible
enough to support both, so why not?

My current idea, which may evolve in a near future, is to make schemas optional and completely
separate them from storage. Schemas will serve as 1) validation for writes and 2) normalization for
reads. They will sit in a layer on top of the actual storage engine. Very much like what TypeScript
is to JavaScript. GraphQL is a also a good example.

Under the hood, the storage engine will have its own dynamic type system. That's the idea behind
archetypes.

### Archetypes

I've spent a portion of the week documenting myself on how to dynamically type objects and ended up
creating what I call Archetypes. I borrowed the name from the [ECS](https://ajmmertens.medium.com/building-an-ecs-1-where-are-my-entities-and-components-63d07c7da742) paradigm which is used by video
game engines. Archetypes might still evolve in the following weeks but the core idea is here.

Conceptually, any kind of data can be modeled using three primitive types:

- **Scalars** represent single values such as numbers or strings.
- **Arrays** represent a list of values.
- **Maps** represent a list of key-value pairs.

These primitive types can easily be inferred at runtime. If you take a JSON object for example, it's
pretty easy to map it to one of these types.

Now let's talk about objects. What exactly are object? Well, there are pretty much Maps with some
constraints:

- Keys are known in advance and must all be present.
- The value for a given key has a fixed type.

The above defines what's called a "field". Archetypes are a way to automatically discover fields and
objects for a given a value. That's pretty much it. An object is always associated to an archetypes which
will dictate how to efficiently marshall the object to the store.

More details in the [RFC](https://github.com/goat-db/rfcs/blob/0001-archetypes/0001-archetypes.md).

## This Week

This week I'm going to:

- finalize the Data Types RFC, the Archetypes RFC depends on it,
- finalize the Archetypes RFC itself,
- implement all of this using the existing spikes as a base.

I really hope I'm going to finalize all of this. This would really help with the motivation. The
most difficult part for me right now is to have the impression to stagnate.

## Learnings

### V8 hidden classes

While doing my research for archetypes, I learned more about
[V8 hidden classes](https://v8.dev/docs/hidden-classes), which is really a great concept. I took
some inspiration from it. But as my needs are pretty different and I need to serialize this to
persistent storage, I didn't use their tree-like approach and based my system on hashing.
