## Last Week

Again, I couldn't finish everything I had planned for last week. The main reason was the
implementation of Primitives (referred to as Data Types in the previous entry) was a bit more
complex to fit in a couple of days. I also had to deal with some personal issues that slowed me
down. But we're holding!

### Da primitives

So first, I switched back to calling data types as primitives. I think it aligns with what
programming languages usually use for their types. The RFC also evolved a little bit. There are now
scalars and collections. Scalars are fundamental values that can be marshaled to only one key-value,
while collections span a whole key range.

I also added back dynamic types introducing the `Any` type. It represents arbitrary values that can
be marshaled dynamically. The `Any` type is essential if we want to be able to share data between
various schemas. Some items in the collection might end up being

### Reader/Writer buffering

To implement Primitives, I needed to refactor the current IO, and de-correlate storage IO from key
and value IO. In other words, you can read/write part of a key/value without iterating/flushing the
next key-value in the store. It makes it possible for objects to share one key-value.

Implementation-wise, this is especially useful for dynamic typing. A "tag" (or discriminant byte)
must be encoded before the actual value. It is usually managed by a Rust wrapper that reads/writes
this tag before calling the appropriate underlying implementation. Buffering allows sharing the same
key-value from different locations in the codebase without creating two distinct ones. It is a nice
for performance and space efficiency as well.

I'm sure I will also find other useful UCs for this feature.

### What about archetypes?

I'm going to postpone Archetypes for now. I consider them as an optimization for objects. In their
current form, objects store their metadata in a ward key-value. It is good enough for now.
Archetypes will only allow making this more space efficient by sharing this metadata across objects.

## This Week

I really need to finish the IO refactoring. That's my top priority. I'm pretty sure I only have 1/2
days left on this.

After this, I hope to finish the whole primitives' implementation with tests. I want to make this
robust right now rather than later. It will be the foundation of every other feature.

## Learnings

### Rust specialization

Not something I learned literally, but rather that I realized I needed hard :smile: Rust
specialization is a long-awaited bag of features that encompasses multiple parts. One of them would
allow specializing a Trait's blanket implementation for different type bounds.

For instance:

```rust
// A base implementation
impl<T: Encode> Write for T {}

// A specialized implementation
impl<T: Encode + Dynamic> Write for T {}
```
